luz 0.3.0 blogpost (#189)
rstudio/ai-blog: _posts/2022-08-23-luz-0-3/luz-0-3.Rmd

---
title: "luz 0.3.0"
description: |
  luz version 0.3.0 is now on CRAN. luz is a high-level interface for torch.
author:
  - name: Daniel Falbel
    affiliation: RStudio
    affiliation_url: https://www.rstudio.com/

> date: 2022-08-23

Reviewer: can you please also add categories, like so:

categories:
  - Torch
  - Packages/Releases
  - R

output:
  distill::distill_article:
    self_contained: false
bibliography: bibliography.bib
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE, eval = FALSE)
```

> We are happy to announce that luz version 0.3.0 is now on CRAN. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are happy to announce that `luz` version 0.3.0 is now on CRAN. This
```

> release brings a few improvements to the included learning rate finder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
release brings a few improvements to the learning rate finder
```

> first contributed to luz by [Chris

Reviewer: ```suggestion
first contributed by [Chris
```

> McMaster](https://github.com/cmcmaster1). Also, as we didn't have a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
McMaster](https://github.com/cmcmaster1). As we didn't have a
```

> 0.2.0 release blog post we will also highlight a few improvements that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
0.2.0 release post, we will also highlight a few improvements that
```

date back to that version.

> ## What's luz?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What's `luz`?
```

> Since luz is [relatively new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since it is [relatively new
```

> package](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2021-06-17-luz/) we are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
package](https://blogs.rstudio.com/ai/posts/2021-06-17-luz/), we are
```

> starting this blog post with a quick recap of how luz works, if you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
starting this blog post with a quick recap of how `luz` works. If you
```

> already know what luz is, feel free to move to the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
already know what `luz` is, feel free to move on to the next section.
```

> luz is a high-level API for torch that aims to encapsulate the training

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`luz` is a high-level API for `torch` that aims to encapsulate the training
```

loop into a set of reusable pieces of code. It reduces the boilerplate

> code required to train a model with torch, avoids the error prone

Reviewer: ```suggestion
required to train a model with `torch`, avoids the error-prone
```

`zero_grad()` - `backward()` - `step()` sequence of calls, and also
simplifies the process of moving data and models between CPUs and GPUs.

> With luz you can take your torch `nn_module()`, for example the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With `luz` you can take your `torch` `nn_module()`, for example the
```

two-layer perceptron defined below:

```{r}
modnn <- nn_module(
  initialize = function(input_size) {
    self$hidden <- nn_linear(input_size, 50)
    self$activation <- nn_relu()
    self$dropout <- nn_dropout(0.4)
    self$output <- nn_linear(50, 1)
  },
  forward = function(x) {
    x %>% 
      self$hidden() %>% 
      self$activation() %>% 
      self$dropout() %>% 
      self$output()
  }
)
```

> and fit it to a specified a dataset with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and fit it to a specified dataset like so:
```

```{r}
fitted <- modnn %>% 
  setup(
    loss = nn_mse_loss(),
    optimizer = optim_rmsprop,
    metrics = list(luz_metric_mae())
  ) %>% 
  set_hparams(input_size = 50) %>% 
  fit(
    data = list(x_train, y_train),
    valid_data = list(x_valid, y_valid),
    epochs = 20
  )
```

> luz will automatically train your model on the GPU if it's available,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`luz` will automatically train your model on the GPU if it's available,
```

> display a nice progress bar during training, handle metric logging,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
display a nice progress bar during training, and handle logging of metrics,
```

> while making sure evaluation on validation data is correctly performed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all while making sure evaluation on validation data is performed in the correct way
```

> (eg. disabling dropout).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(e.g., disabling dropout).
```

> luz can be extended in many different layers of abstraction so you can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`uz` can be extended in many different layers of abstraction, so you can
```

> gradually learn how it works as you need more advanced features in your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
improve your knowledge gradually, as you need more advanced features in your
```

project. For example, you can implement [custom
metrics](https://mlverse.github.io/luz/reference/luz_metric.html),

> [callbacks](https://mlverse.github.io/luz/reference/luz_callback.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[callbacks](https://mlverse.github.io/luz/reference/luz_callback.html),
```

> or even customizing the [internal training

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or even customize the [internal training
```

loop](https://mlverse.github.io/luz/articles/custom-loop.html).

> If you want to get started with luz read the [getting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn about `luz`, read the [getting
```

started](https://mlverse.github.io/luz/articles/get-started.html)

> section in the website and navigate trough the [examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
section on the website, and browse the [examples
```

gallery](https://mlverse.github.io/luz/articles/examples/index.html).

> ## What's new luz?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What's new in `luz`?
```

### Learning rate finder

In deep learning, finding a good learning rate is essential to be able
to fit your model. If it's too low, you will need too many iterations
for your loss to converge, and that might be impractical if your model
takes too long to run. If it's too high, the loss can explode and you

> might never be able to minimize the loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
might never be able to arrive at a minimum.
```

> The `lr_finder()` function implements the ['Cyclical Learning Rates for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `lr_finder()` function implements the algorithm detailed in [Cyclical Learning Rates for
```

> Training Neural Networks'](https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01186)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Training Neural Networks](https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.01186)
```

> ([@smith2015]) popularized in the FastAI framework ([@howard2020]). It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[@smith2015] popularized in the FastAI framework [@howard2020]. It
```

Reviewer: I think this should evaluate correctly, without the double parens. Can you please check when rendering?

> takes a `nn_module()` and some data to produce a data frame with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
takes an `nn_module()` and some data to produce a data frame with the
```

> losses and the learning rate in each step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
losses and the learning rate at each step.
```

```{r}
model <- net %>% setup(
  loss = torch::nn_cross_entropy_loss(),
  optimizer = torch::optim_adam
)

records <- lr_finder(
  object = model, 
  data = train_ds, 
  verbose = FALSE,
  dataloader_options = list(batch_size = 32),
  start_lr = 1e-6, # the smallest value that will be tried
  end_lr = 1 # the largest value to be experimented with
)

str(records)
#> Classes 'lr_records' and 'data.frame':   100 obs. of  2 variables:
#>  $ lr  : num  1.15e-06 1.32e-06 1.51e-06 1.74e-06 2.00e-06 ...
#>  $ loss: num  2.31 2.3 2.29 2.3 2.31 ...
```

You can use the built-in plot method to display the exact results, along

> with a exponentially smoothed value of the loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with an exponentially smoothed value of the loss.
```

```{r}
plot(records) +
  ggplot2::coord_cartesian(ylim = c(NA, 5))
```

![Plot displaying the results of the lr_finder()](images/lr-finder.png)

If you want to learn how to interpret the results of this plot and learn
more about the methodology read the [learning rate finder

> article](https://mlverse.github.io/luz/articles/lr-finder.html) in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
article](https://mlverse.github.io/luz/articles/lr-finder.html) on the
```

> luz website.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`luz` website.
```

### Data handling

> In the first release of luz the only kind of object that was allowed to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the first release of `luz`, the only kind of object that was allowed to
```

> be used as input data in `fit` was a torch `dataloader()`. As of version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be used as input data to `fit` was a `torch` `dataloader()`. As of version
```

> 0.2.0, luz also support's R matrices/arrays (or nested lists of them) as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
0.2.0, `luz` also support's R matrices/arrays (or nested lists of them) as
```

> input data as well as torch `dataset()`s.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
input data, as well as `torch` `dataset()`s.
```

> Supporting low level abstractions like `dataloader()`'s as input data is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supporting low level abstractions like `dataloader()` as input data is
```

> important as with them the user can have full control over how input

Reviewer: ```suggestion
important, as with them the user has full control over how input
```

> data is loaded - for example, you can create parallel dataloaders,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data is loaded. For example, you can create parallel dataloaders,
```

> change how shuffling is performed and etc - however having to manually

Reviewer: ```suggestion
change how shuffling is done, and more. However, having to manually
```

> define the dataloader is not very ergonomic when you don't need to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
define the dataloader seems unnecessarily tedious when you don't need to
```

> customize all this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
customize any of this.
```

Another small improvement from version 0.2.0, inspired by Keras, is that

> you can pass a value between 0 and 1 to the `valid_data` and luz will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can pass a value between 0 and 1 to `fit`'s `valid_data` parameter, and `luz` will
```

> take a random sample of that size from the traning set to be used as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
take a random sample of that proportion from the training set, to be used for
```

validation data.

Read more about this in the documentation of the
[`fit()`](https://mlverse.github.io/luz/reference/fit.luz_module_generator.html#arguments)
function.

### New callbacks

> New built-in callbacks were added to luz in latest releases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In recent releases, new built-in callbacks were added to `luz`:
```

-   `luz_callback_gradient_clip()`: Helps avoiding loss divergence by
    clipping large gradients.
-   `luz_callback_keep_best_model()`: Each epoch, if there's improvement

>     in the monitored metric we serialize the model weights to a temp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    in the monitored metric, we serialize the model weights to a temporary
```

    file. When training is done, we reload weights from the best model.
-   `luz_callback_mixup()`: Implementation of ['mixup: Beyond Empirical
    Risk Minimization'](https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.09412)

>     ([@zhang2017]). mixup is a nice data augmentation technique that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ([@zhang2017]). Mixup is a nice data augmentation technique that
```

    helps improving model consistency and overall performance.

## Final remarks

You can see the full changelog available
[here](https://mlverse.github.io/luz/news/index.html).

In this post we would also like to thank:

-   [\@jonthegeek](https://github.com/jonthegeek) for valuable

>     improvements in the luz getting started guides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    improvements in the `luz` getting-started guides.
```
